---
title: "About"
description: "All India Kisan Khet Majdoor Sangathan."
draft: false
layout: about
---

AIKKMS is a revolutionary peasants and Agricultural labourers’ organization. It was established in the year 1950 through a convention organized at Joyanagar of WestBengal. Since then, being guided by a great Marxist philosopher com Shibdas Ghosh, it has been waging relentless and uncompromising fights against their exploitation by the present ruling capitalist order. It is working throughout the country in more than 15 states. At present renowned mass leaders Com Satyavan and Com Shankar Ghosh are the president and General secretaries respectively of the organization.

AIKKMS is of the considered view that the problems of the peasants and Agricultural labourers in the country are due to the capitalist system which is prevailing in the society. Governments both at the centre and different states since independence to this day are working for the benefits of the capitalist class. The whole objective of the governments is to somehow guarantee market to the capitalist class. Therefore they have not inclined to take up anything that would ameliorate the strains and pathos of the peasants and agricultural labourers. Peasants are simply exposed to ruthless exploitation and fraud is perpetrated on them.

Every thing is controlled by capitalist owners in the country. They decide the prices of Agricultural inputs and govts have no say over it. Naturally, this would embolden them to increase the prices of the inputs beyond the reach of the farmers and so the peasants to meet the expences of the cultivation are forced to take loan and because govt is not interested in loaning the peasants, they do not get necessary loans from the government, therefore they will be compelled to submit to moneylenders who are bereft of mercy and human sensitivities.

And again, at the end of the season when the harvest is over even the prices of the farm produces is also decided by the capitalist owners. Peasants have no say over their own produce, and government hangs down its head in front of the capitalist owners and express its helplessness to the peasants. Therefore every other year peasants are exposed to distress sale and even after a yearlong toiling in the fields they will be left with nothing but loans and loans! They will become pauper and therefore having no way to escape the attack from the money lenders they feel humiliated and resort to suicide. But these governments committed to the capitalists are not bothered. The life of the peasants is nothing for them! They only shed their crocodile tears! The condition of the Agricultural labourers is also equally distressing. They don’t have work throughout the year. They are leaving the villages and migrating to cities in search of jobs and they are in a state of total hopelessness. They don’t have a dwelling there. They have to live together as if in hordes. Literally it is subhuman existence. But the government is careless! This state affairs is true throughout the country. This is because the system prevailing in this society is capitalist system. Here, all aspects of life are governed by the necessities of the capitalist owners. Every policy and programme of the society is brought only to guard the capitalist class. Therefore now it is time that the toiling millions of the country, the peasants and the agricultural labourers must forge unity to fight this capitalist rule and snatch justice for themselves Therefore All India Krishak Khetmazdur Sanghatan (AIKKMS) is aiming at it and so under this light it calls upon the peasants and the agricultural labourers to organize uncompromising movements against any attack on them and to establish justice in the society!

AIKKMS organised peasants' struggle all over the country on the basis of Comrade Shibdas Ghosh's thought. In this struggle hundreds of our workers embraced martyr's death, faced life imprisonment and other forms of state oppression. But still AIKKMS is firm to its conviction. We are sure, that day will come when the oppressed people of our country will liberate itself from the yoke of capitalist exploitation.


